In the last week of this course, we looked
at some advanced topics, so let us begin with
Linear Programming.
So, the times of problems we have looked at
so far are largely optimization type of tasks.
So, we are looking for shortest paths in a
graph or we are trying to identify the minimum
cost spanning tree or we are looking for the
longest common subsequence. So, we are trying
to optimize some quantity the length of the
path, or the cost of the tree or the length
of the sub sequence, and then this come this
optimization takes place subject to a constraint.
So, when we are looking for paths, the constraints
are given by the graph itself, so the path
must follow the given edges in the graph.
So, as the graph changes the path that we
identified will also change. Similarly, we
are looking for spanning trees with respect
to a given graph. So, in each graph we ask
to first identify the different spanning trees
and look for the smallest cost one among them.
Similarly, with two sub sequences the actual
letters in the sequence determine what is
common between them.
So, we can look at a more general formulation
of such constraint optimization problems in
the framework of what is called linear programming.
So, in linear programming we are given some
variables, some quantities that we want to
calculate and then there are some linear functions
that constraint these quantities. So, linear
function remember of a variable x is something
of the form a x plus b. So, it has no x square
x cube term, it is all linear, so we have
a x plus b.
So, in general then if we have multiple variables
x y z, then we could have a constraint of
the form a x plus b y plus something is less
than equal to some constant or a x plus b
y plus something is greater than equal to
some constant. And then, these are the constraints
on the values that the variables can take
and now our aim is to optimize some quantity,
we want to minimize or maximize some cause
or some weights or something like that and
that quantity is expressed in terms of the
variable by yet another linear function.
So, we have some function which I will again
write as a x plus b y, but it is a different
set of coefficients of course, for each other
constraints and for the objective function.
So, we have a different linear function which
tells us what it is we are trying to optimize.
So, the best way to understand linear programming
to begin with is to look at an example. So,
suppose we are running a sweets shop called
grandiose sweets and we tell sell two types
of sweets, barfis and halwa. Now, we know
that each box of barfis earns a profit of
100 rupees and each box of halwa earns a profit
of 600 rupees. So obviously, it makes sense
to make more halwa than barfis. Now, we also
know that on a given day we cannot sell more
than 200 barfi boxes, we cannot sell more
than 300 halwa boxes and together the staff
can only produce 400 boxes. So, now if you
make 400 boxes, we can only sell 300 halwa,
200 barfis, so we need to make both. So, the
question is given these constraints, what
combination of barfis and halwa should we
make.
So, let us start by identifying the variables
that we are trying to manipulate. So, we’re
talking about the daily production of these
sweets, so we will use two variables b and
h to denote the number of boxes of barfis
and halwa that we produce in a day. Now, given
this we know that our profit is 100 rupees
per box of barfis and 600 rupees for box of
halwa. So, it is totally 100 b plus 600 h,
we also have some information about how much
we can sell, so you know that we cannot sell
more than 200 boxes of barfi a day.
So, b must be less than or equal to 200 and
we cannot sell more than 300 boxes of halwa
a day, so h must be less than or equal to
300. And finally, we have told that together
our staff are only capable of producing 400
boxes altogether, whether barfi or halwa any
combination and implicitly of course, we can
only make a non zero quantity of barfis, so
we cannot make minus 7 boxes of barfis. So,
we have these implicit constraints, we say
that both b and h must be greater than zero.
So, now we can put these all together into
a set of inequalities and then an objective
function and call it a linear program.
So, our objective is to maximize the profit,
so this is the profit, so this is what we
are trying to maximize, the quantity 100 b
plus 600 h and we cannot choose obviously,
if b and h can vary, then we can make them
as large as we want, but there are these constraints.
So, b and h must lie between 0 and 200 and
0 and 300 respectively and together they can
be no more than 400. So, these are the constraints
we wrote in the previous page, now we are
just writing them down, the system of equations
are inequalities.
So, we can visualize this quite easily in
this case, because there are two quantities
basically b and h that we want to compute
and we are given a set of facts about them.
So, we know that b lies between 0 and 200,
so the range for b is anything in this region.
At the same time, we also know that h lies
between 0 and 300, so this constraints the
space that we can look at to this rectangle.
And finally, we have the other constraint
that together b plus h must be less than 400,
so now that’s on this side of this lines.
So, we now have to be within this trapezium.
So, overall this gives us what we can call
a feasible region, any point to in this region
represents a combination of b value and h
value which means all the constraints. Now,
we have to introduce our profit function,
so our objective is 100 b plus 600 h and depending
on what values that b and h we choose, this
will be equal to sum c. So, we can examine
what this looks like for different values
of c.
So, for example, if you set our profit to
be 60,000 then any quantity along this line,
any value of b and h which is inside the orange
feasible region will give us 60,000. All these
points give us 100 b plus 600 h equal to 60,000.
Now, if I move this line across this region,
the value changes.
If I move it further or I can go from 60,000
to 1,20,000, 1 lakh 20,000.
If I move it still further, I can get 1 lakh
50,000.
When that line actually leaves the region,
at that corner vertex where the trapezium
turns bends down, we find that we can get
1 lakh 90,000 and it turns out that this is
actually going to be the optimum value. Now,
this optimum value happens at some corner
of this trapezium and this is generally the
case, one can argue that the optimal value
will always occur at a vertex. Because, as
we saw here the function we are trying to
optimize is a line and as we sweep across
the feasible region, the value will keep either
increasing or decreasing and so far where
it leaves the region it will be some vertex.
Now, it could be that supposing this optimum
line that actually been parallel to this,
then both this vertex and this vertex would
both have been optimal perhaps and on every
point along this line. So, it is not saying
that there are not optimal values away from
vertices, but definitely there will be some
vertex which has an optimum value. So, our
goal is only to find an optimum solution,
it is enough to look at the vertices.
So, in fact, this is how the very famous simplest
simplex algorithm works. So, what it does
is, it constructs this feasible region which
is bounded by our constraints and then it
picks a vertex. So, we will not discuss it
in detail, but you have to generalize this
notion of a corner, in two dimensions it is
quite easy to imagine what a vertex is. But,
in we have multiple constraints we have to
optimize more than two dimensions, then you
need to define vertex properly, but intuitively
a vertex is a corner of this feasible region.
So, we start at any of these vertices, evaluate
the objective function, then we look at the
neighboring vertices. If any adjacent vertex,
any neighbor has a better value we move to
that neighbor, if none of our neighbors are
better than us, in terms of the objective
then we stop and announce that this vertex
is the optimal. So, we will not go into a
proof in this lecture that this is, if it
is actually correct, but it is not hard to
argue this, but there of course, a lot of
details which need to be worked out to implement
simplex correctly.
So, one of the problems which simplex is theoretically
can be exponential, but actually in practice
it turns out to be a very effective algorithm
to solve linear programs. Now, there are theoretically
efficient algorithms, so there is a polynomial
time algorithm for linear programming, is
there are so called the interior point methods
and there is a method due to Narendra Karmarkar
which many people may have heard of.
These are more complicated to describe and
programs, simplex is probably easier to program,
but what we need to know as far as we are
concerned is that once you set up a set of
constraints and an objective function using
linear constraints, you can solve it efficiently.
So, of course, you also have to when a solution
is exist. So, in our case we had a solution
where we had a feasible region which looks
like a trapezium like this. So, the first
point is that the feasible region will already
be convex, convex means that if you take any
two points inside the region and you can connect
them by a line, the entire line stays in the
region. So, for instance if I have a shape
which looks like this, then this is not convex,
because I can pick two points inside and then
connected by a line and this line in this
portion leaves the region.
So, the feasible space will always be convex,
but it could be empty. Supposing, we had an
extra constraint in an earlier thing which
says that everything must be below this line,
now when addition to the orange if I had this
blue constraint, then there is no point that
satisfies everything. So, the constraints
are unsatisfiable, the feasible region become
empty and there will be no solutions. The
other possibility is that we do not constrain
it enough, so we could just say that supposing
we started only, we only say that say for
example, h must be less than 300, then this
has an unbounded region.
So, as I draw my blue line as I have done
before and I keep moving it up, it says that
profit keeps increasing, there is no upper
point. So, there are these pathological cases
where either the feasible region is empty
or it is unbounded, where you will not find
the solution. But, if it is bounded, then
what the theory of linear programming tells
us is that the objective function will lie,
it is maximum or minimum will lie along on
a vertex along the boundary of that bounded
region and so it is sufficient to examine
those and that is what simplex does.
So, just to get a little bit more practice
at this, let us extend the example. So, now,
in addition to our barfi and halwa which have
the same details as before a 100 rupee profit
for barfis, 600 for halwa we added almond
rasmalai which gives us a much higher profit
of 1300. An almond rasmalai actually people
are willing to buy in an unlimited quantity.
So, the earlier demand for barfis and halwa
is the same, 200 and 300, but almond rasmalai
can be sold in unlimited amounts.
Unfortunately, we have not got any new staff,
so we are still restricted to producing a
total of 400 boxes and now we have an extra
constraint which is in terms of what we can
do with the milk that we get. So, with the
milk that we get we can either makes 600 boxes
of halwa in a day or 200 of rasmalai or any
combination of this. So, effectively a box
of rasmalai requires three times as much as
milk as a box of halwa. So, now, again given
these constraints we want to find out what
is the most optimum production schedule that
we should impose on our sweet shop.
So, if we look at the equation now, the objective
function now has an extra quantity which is
the profit we get from rasmalai. So, we have
an extra variable, we have b and h which are
as before barfi and halwa and r for rasmalai,
so we can get 100 rupees per box of barfi,
600 rupees per box of halwa and 1300 per box
of rasmalai. The constraints on barfi and
halwa demand are the same and there is no
constraint for rasmalai, so we do not add
anything there. The total production now includes
the rasmalai, so all three together must be
blue 400 and this expressives the milk constraint.
So, this is at one extreme, I can make 600
boxes of the halwa, at the other extreme I
can make 200 boxes of rasmalai, because 200
times replace 600 rupees. But, I can make
any combination and that would produces, requires
the same amount of milk or less. So, h plus
3 r must be less than equal to 600, so this
is the milk constraint. And finally, of course,
all three of these quantities must be bigger
than or equal to 0.
So, in this case if we draw this picture,
now it becomes a three dimensional geometrical
object, because we have three axis b, h and
now r coming out in the vertical direction
and the constraints now instead of the lines,
they become these planes. So, the kind of
become now instead of a polygon, we have what
is called polytope, we have a three dimensional
object. And again we will find that you get
the optimum at some corner and the optimum
happens to be in this case that you make zero
barfis, you make a full amount 300 halwa and
then you make the rest into rasmalai and then
you get a profit of 3 lakhs 10,000.
So, so we might ask, is this really the case?
So, is this really our best thing? So, remember
that if I do this, I get 300 into 600, so
I get 1 lakh 80,000 from here and you get
1 lakh 30,000 for here and thus how we get
a 3 lakhs 10,000. So, is it how do I know
that this answer is actually the best? So,
here is an interesting observation that we
can make. So, these are some of the constraints
that we had before, we had just remove the
one which says that the three values b, h
and r are greater than zero, because that
is not useful.
Now, in this supposing I take the three constraints
labeled A, B and C. Now, in general if I take
a constraint and I multiplied, so if I say
2 h is less than equal to 600. So, we know
from simple algebra that this is same as h
is less than equal to 300. So, in the same
way I can multiply each constraint by a constant,
I can also combine them. I can take some combination
of A plus some combination of B plus some
combination of C, it tells us nothing new,
we just combines it in a different format.
So, supposing I take 100 times this and I
take 100 times B again and I take 400 times
C and I add them, so I will get 100 h plus
100 h plus 400 h that is 600 h. Then I will
get 100 b and finally, I will get 1200 plus
100, it is 1300 r. So, combining A, B and
C with this combination or I multiply A by
100, B by 100, C by 400, I produce some new
inequality. But, this new inequality tells
us something interesting, because in fact
what we have on the left hand side is our
profit.
So, the profit is exactly 100 b plus 600 h,
1300 r, we are trying to maximize this and
what our constraints tell us is that in the
feasible region, this value can be no more
than three something it should be, 3 lakhs
10,000. In other words, this is actually the
optimum profit, because from our constraints
we can derive the fact that we cannot get
anything more than this, hence this must be
an optimum value. So, in this particular example
it seems that we can prove to ourselves that
we have achieved an optimum by just doing
something clever with that constraint.
So, it turns out that fortunately this is
not a coincidence, it turns out you can always
construct such a combination. So, if I have
my constraints C 1, C 2, so these are my constraint
equations, I can always find some combination.
So, I can take some lambda 1 C 1, lambda 2
C 2, I can add these up and then I can get
from that some upper bound and that upper
bound will actually tell me, whether or not
the solution I found is correct. So, this
is called the dual of the LP and again we
are not going to look into the theory of this,
but this is useful to know that we can take
the formulation that we start with for LP
and then we can ask an another question which
is what is the minimum value that we can get
by combining the constraints with some linear
multipliers.
So, we get new variables which are exactly
these multipliers. What are the values of
lambda 1 to lambda k which minimize the combination
lambda 1 C 1 plus lambda 2 C 2 plus lambda
k C k? So, this is my new question, I want
to minimize this and then this becomes another
LP problem and I solve that and it turns out
that the dual and the original have a solution
if and only if that solution is the optimum
for both. So, this gives us the one way of
justifying that I given linear programming
problem has been solved correctly.